[Music]
okay has it finally come is the future
now well we got jetpacks hoverboards
Holograms all the things we used to see
in old sci-fi movies well maybe not the
jetpack so much but now electric cars
you plug into the wall like a cell phone
so who came up with the idea and how
does the technology really work before
we rejoice in the future let's first
take a trip to the past Oh we'll be
going a lot further back than you think
you probably would be surprised as I was
to find out that electric cars aren't a
21st century invention that is electric
powered motors came out pretty much at
the same time as petroleum driven
engines that is the ones that run on
fossil fuels like gas and diesel almost
two centuries ago in 1828 a Hungarian
engineer named anos jedlica invented the
first prototype of the electric motor
and used it to power a small model car
and he wasn't the only one with an
interest in that sort of technology in
1834 blacksmith Thomas Davenport created
a similar device that could be driven at
short distances using an electric track
does that ring any bells
think streetcars later on and over in
the Netherlands University professor so
brand is Stratton build a tiny electric
car powered with non-rechargeable
batteries now even though the idea of a
battery-powered vehicle was to
revolutionize people's lives for the
better
primary cell batteries that's the use
one and toss'd kind weren't the way to
go
for obvious reasons they needed too many
batteries to run the motor over long
distances at such low speeds
it wasn't until 1859 when French
physicists guest on plod invented the
lead acid battery that changed the
electric engine game for good many
countries began producing electric
three-wheeled cars until the u.s. made a
huge breakthrough in 1891 they created
the first electric vehicle
get this it was a six passenger wagon
that could go up to 14 miles per hour
hey that was major back dad after that
people were thrilled and the electric
car market thrived in the late 1890s
electric powered taxis filled the
streets of London at that time
electric cars had many advantages over
steam-powered and gas guzzling engines
they didn't vibrate they didn't give off
that awful burning gasoline smell that
we're all familiar with and most
importantly they didn't require much
effort to start by the early 1900's
almost 1/3 of cars in the US were
electric powered but that wasn't going
to last for long by the late 1920s
infrastructure in the US had improved
significantly and vehicles needed to go
further more efficiently so fossil fuel
cars took the lead because they got the
job done you see the top speed that
electric cars could achieve was 15 to 20
miles per hour that's about how fast you
can go pedaling on your bike another
problem was that electric powered
engines back then could only travel 30
to 40 miles on one go which mean they'd
need charging every couple of hours and
things were about to take a turn for the
worse along with the improvement in
infrastructure that's when the electric
starter was invented and gasoline cars
began using it alongside mufflers which
made their noise a lot more tolerable
electric cars took their final hit in
1910 when Henry Ford began his mass
production of gas-powered vehicles which
made them ridiculously cheap
whereas electric cars cost a lot more
companies then realized that there was
no room for electric automobiles on the
market so they stopped producing them
altogether
fast-forward to the 21st century we now
have advancements in technology and a
greater concern for the environment add
a fear of running out of resources to
fuel our vehicles and it's no wonder
automotive companies have decided to
give electric cars another chance the
main difference between electric and
fossil fueled cars is that the e cars
can use a variety of renewable
sources to generate their electricity in
fact the science behind the electric car
is surprisingly simple its basic
principle is the alternating current for
which we have Nikola Tesla to thank more
than a century ago before you understand
the science behind that let's back up
and first cover the differences between
direct and alternating currents that's
DC and AC for short or AC DC if you're
into hard rock an electric current is
the movement of an electric charge that
carries electrons an engine for example
can be powered by direct current which
means that the electrons flow in one
direction only for most things that run
on DC that's from the battery to
whatever it's powering the electrons
that move along an alternating current
on the other hand periodically and
consistently change direction it's
pretty much all the electric power in
your home from your microwave to your
game console in short if you could look
at the two types of current on a graph
direct would be a flat line and
alternating would have regular uniform
waves going up and down or to put it
even more simply DC would be like water
running out of a bucket with a hole in
the bottom
AC would be kind of like watching the
water swish around back and forth if you
open the lid of your washer and look
inside okay enough of that so what about
electric car specifically well most of
them convert the direct current
electricity from the batteries into an
alternating current
since electric cars don't have an
internal combustion engine like gas
powered vehicles do they use their space
quite differently you'd normally expect
a big bulky battery to be in the front
under the hood but it's completely
different in electric cars they have
7000 lithium-ion batteries that sit
under the flooring this battery pack has
a longer lifespan and a higher power
density which makes them ideal for
powering a vehicle but one of their
vulnerabilities is overheating and
thermal breakdown that's why electric
cars have coolant running between them
to prevent overheating and there's all
kinds of interesting stuff at the back
of the car that's where you'll find the
inverter
which is what converts that DC into AC
and gives power to the engine but it
can't do that without the induction
motor it's also in the back and it takes
the alternating current that just came
from the inverter and creates a rotating
magnetic field that causes the motor to
turn now electric cars don't have a
gearbox or lever and all of them are
automatic they have a single speed
transmission that sends power from the
induction motor to the wheels this is
how the electric motor transforms
electrical energy into mechanical energy
that is the physical power that turns
the wheels and send you on your way but
here's where it gets even more
interesting when you accelerate while
driving the car uses more energy but
when you brake the energy is transformed
into electricity through the induction
motor then that electricity travels all
the way back to the battery pack and is
stored so you can use it later
now that's efficient an electric car
gets juiced up by being plugged into an
outlet or a charging station and they
use three main levels of charging the
first level is the basic charging you
can do at home
it uses an outlet of 120 volts and adds
two to five miles of charging per hour
then there's the second level it uses
electric vehicle supply equipment and as
a higher voltage 220 to 240 volts to add
10 to 25 miles per hour of charging
finally the third and most efficient one
is the direct current charging station
which does exactly what it says it uses
direct current to add up to 80% of the
car's battery storage in less than half
an hour the cost of charging an electric
car is dirt cheap as well
it'll cost you less than five bucks to
fully charge your electric vehicle at
home and you can get up to 150 miles on
one charge that of course depends on the
size of the battery bigger electric cars
with bigger batteries could cost up to
$15 to fully charge but they can cover
up to 300 miles whew where do I sign now
electric cars are less expensive to run
and maintain if we compare them to fuel
powered vehicles but there's no denying
that the car itself comes with a much
higher price tag but still according to
a recent study the average operating
cost of an electric car is 485 bucks a
year whereas a fossil fuel automobile is
1117 dollars so that higher initial
price should pay itself off over time
but there's still another problem one of
the most expensive components of the
electric car is its battery pack it'll
cost you an arm and a leg to replace it
if it breaks down expect anywhere from
five thousand to fifteen thousand
dollars for replacement but most
electric car manufacturers give the
battery at least an eight year warranty
for up to 100,000 miles if that makes
you feel any better about purchasing the
good news is that we're seeing a huge
movement toward electric powered
vehicles as a strategy to tackle fuel
emissions and reduce pollution the head
of automotive research in Europe
predicts that by 2025 all cars in Europe
will be totally electric or at least
hybrid and many countries are setting
goals to lower their fuel emissions in
the next few years so who knows maybe
sooner than later we'll all be zipping
around in electric cars and gas guzzlers
really will be a thing of the past
so what about you are you interested in
getting an electric car let me know down
in the comments if you learned something
new today then give this video a like
and share with a friend but hey don't go
buy your Tesla just yet we have over two
thousand cool videos for you to check
out all you have to do is pick the left
or right video click on it and enjoy
stay on the bright side of life